Asthma in adults - what to ask the doctor

Asthma is a problem with the lung airways. A person with asthma may not feel symptoms all the time. But when an asthma attack happens, it becomes hard for air to pass through your airways. The symptoms are usually:

Coughing
Wheezing
Chest tightness
Shortness of breath
In rare cases, asthma causes chest pain.

Below are some questions you may want to ask your health care provider to help you take care of your asthma.

Questions
Am I taking my asthma medicines the right way?

What medicines should I be taking every day (called controller medicines)? What should I do if I miss a day or a dose?
How should I adjust my medicines if I feel better or worse?
Which medicines should I take when I am short of breath (called rescue or quick-relief medicines)? Is it OK to use these rescue medicines every day?
What are the side effects of my medicines? For what side effects should I contact my provider?
Am I using my inhaler the right way? Should I be using a spacer? How will I know when my inhalers are getting empty?
When should I use my nebulizer instead of my inhaler?
What are some signs that my asthma is getting worse and that I need to contact my provider? What should I do when I feel short of breath? Should I be using a peak flow meter?

What shots or vaccinations do I need?

What will make my asthma worse?

How can I prevent things that can make my asthma worse?
How can I prevent getting a lung infection?
How can I get help quitting smoking?
How do I find out when smog or pollution is worse?
What sort of changes should I make around my home?

Can I have a pet? In the house or outside? How about in the bedroom?
Is it OK for me to clean and vacuum in the house?
Is it OK to have carpets in the house?
What type of furniture is best to have?
How do I get rid of dust and mold in the house? Do I need to cover my bed or pillows?
How do I know if I have cockroaches in my home? How do I get rid of them?
Can I have a fire in my fireplace or wood-burning stove?
What sort of changes do I need to make at work?

What exercises are better for me to do?

Are there times when I should avoid being outside and exercising?
Are there things that I can do before I start exercising?
Would I benefit from pulmonary rehabilitation?
Do I need tests or treatments for allergies? What should I do when I know I am going to be around something that triggers my asthma?

What type of planning do I need to do before I travel?

What medicines should I bring?
Whom should I contact if my asthma gets worse?
Should I have extra medicines in case something happens?
Am I at risk for COVID-19 or other illness? What should I do to protect myself?

Alternative Names
What to ask your doctor about asthma - adult

