Asthma in children - what to ask your doctor

Asthma is a problem with the airways that bring oxygen to your lungs. A child with asthma may not feel symptoms all the time. But when an asthma attack happens, it becomes hard for air to pass through the airways. The symptoms are:

Coughing
Wheezing
Chest tightness
Shortness of breath
Below are some questions you may want to ask your health care provider to help you take care of your child's asthma.

Questions
Is my child taking asthma medicines the right way?

What medicines should my child take every day (called control medicines)? What should I do if my child misses a day?
Which medicines should my child take when they are short of breath (called rescue medicines)? Is it OK to use these rescue medicines every day?
What are the side effects of these medicines? For what side effects should I call my child's provider?
How will I know when the inhalers are getting empty? Is my child using the inhaler the right way? Should my child be using a spacer?
What are some signs that my child's asthma is getting worse and that I need to contact the provider? What should I do when my child feels short of breath?

What shots or vaccinations does my child need?

How do I find out when smog or pollution is worse?

What sort of changes should I make around the home?

Can we have a pet in the house? How about in the bedroom?
Is it OK for anyone to smoke in the house? How about if my child is not in the house when someone is smoking?
Is it OK for me to clean and vacuum when my child is in the house?
Is it OK to have carpets in the house?
What type of furniture is best to have?
How do I get rid of dust and mold in the house? Do I need to cover my child's bed or pillows?
Can my child have stuffed animals?
How do I know if I have cockroaches in my home? How do I get rid of them?
Can I have a fire in my fireplace or a wood-burning stove?
What does my child's school or daycare need to know about my child's asthma?

Do I need to have an asthma plan for the school?
How can I make sure my child can use the medicines at school?
Can my child participate fully in gym class at school?
What types of exercises or activities are better for a child with asthma to do?

Are there times when my child should avoid being outside?
Are there things that I can do before my child starts exercising?
Does my child need tests or treatments for allergies? What should I do when I know my child will be around something that triggers their asthma?

What type of arrangements do I need to make when we are planning to travel?

What medicines should I bring? How do we get refills?
Who should I call if my child's asthma gets worse?
Alternative Names
What to ask your doctor about asthma - child

